is et out there well I work at the SETI
Institute that's almost my name SETI
search for extraterrestrial intelligence
in other words I look for aliens and
when I tell people that at a cocktail
party they usually look at me with a
mildly incredulous look on their face I
try to keep my own face somewhat
dispassionate a lot of people think that
this is kind of idealistic ridiculous
maybe even hopeless but I just want to
talk to you a little bit about why I
think that the job I have is actually a
privilege okay and give you a little bit
of the motivation for my getting into
this line of work if that's what you
call it this thing whoops can we go back
hello come in earth there we go all
right now this is the Owens Valley radio
Observatory behind the Sierra Nevadas
and in 1968 I was working there
collecting data for my thesis that's
kind of lonely it's kind of tedious is
collecting data so I would amuse myself
by taking photos at night at the
telescopes or even of myself because you
know it at night I would be the only
hominid within about 30 miles so here
are pictures of myself the observatory
had just acquired a new book written by
a Russian cosmologies by the name of
Joseph Loski and then expanded and
translated and edited by a little-known
Cornell astronomer by name of Carl Sagan
and I remember reading that book and at
3:00 in the morning of reading this book
and it was explaining how the antennas I
was using to measure the the spins of
galaxies could also be used to
communicate to send bits of information
from one star system to another now
three o'clock in the morning when you're
all alone haven't had much sleep that
was a very romantic idea but it was that
idea the fact that you could in fact
prove that there's somebody out there
just using the same technology that
appealed to me so much that 20 years
later I took a job at the SETI Institute
now I have to say that my memory is
notoriously porous and I've often
wondered whether there was any truth in
this story was just
miss remembering something but I
recently just blew up this old negative
of mine and sure enough there you can
see the Schloss Keene Sagan book
underneath that analog calculating
device so it's true all right now the
idea for doing this it wasn't very old
at the time that I made that photo the
idea dates from 1961 a young astronomer
by the name of Frank Drake used this
antenna in West Virginia pointed at a
couple of nearby stars in the hopes of
eavesdropping on et now Frank didn't
hear anything actually he did but it
turned out to be the US Air Force which
doesn't count as extraterrestrial
intelligence but Drake's idea here
became very popular because it was very
appealing I'll get back to that and on
the basis of this experiment what you
didn't didn't succeed
we have been doing SETI ever since not
continuously but ever since we still
haven't heard anything we still haven't
heard anything in fact we don't know
about any life beyond Earth but I'm
going to suggest to you that that's
going to change rather soon and the part
of the reason in fact the majority of
the reason why I think that's going to
change is that the equipment's getting
better this is the Allen telescope array
about 350 miles from whatever seat
you're in right now this is something
that we're using today to search for et
and the electronics have gotten very
much better - this is Frank Drake's
electronics in 1960 this is the Allen
telescope array electronics today some
pundit with too much time on his hands
has reckoned that the new experiments
are approximately a hundred trillion
times better than they were in 1960
hundred trillion times better
that's a degree of an improvement that
would look good on your report card okay
but something that's not appreciated by
the public is in fact that the
experiment continues to get better and
consequently tends to get faster this
little plot and every time you show a
plot you lose 10% of the audience
I have 12 of these but whatever what I
brought in here is just some metric that
shows how fast we're searching in other
words we're looking for a needle in a
haystack we know how big they stack is
it's the galaxy but we're going through
the haystack no longer with the teaspoon
but with a skip loader because of this
increase in speed in fact those of you
who are still conscious and
mathematically you know competent will
note that this is a semi-log plot in
other words the
the rate of increase is exponential it's
exponentially improving now exponential
is an overworked word you hear it on the
media all the time they don't really
know what exponential means but this is
exponential in fact it's doubling every
18 months and of course every
card-carrying member the digerati knows
that that's Moore's law so this means
that over the course of the next 2,000
years we'll be able to look at a million
star systems a million star systems
looking for signals that would prove
somebody's out there well a million star
systems is that interesting I mean how
many of those star systems have planets
and in fact sorry we didn't know the
answer to that even as recently as
fifteen years ago and in fact we really
didn't know it even as recently six
months ago but now we do recent results
suggest that virtually every star has
planets and more than one they're like
you know kittens you get no you know you
get a litter you don't get one kit and
you get a bunch okay so in fact this is
a pretty accurate estimate of the number
of planets in our galaxy just in our
galaxy way and I remind the non
astronomy majors among you that our
galaxy is only one of a hundred billion
that we can see with our telescopes
that's a lot of real estate but of
course most these planets are going to
be kind of worthless like you know
mercury or Neptune Neptune is probably
not very big in your life okay so the
question is what fraction of these
planets are actually suitable for life
we don't know the answer to that either
but we will learn that answer this year
thanks to NASA's Kepler space telescope
and in fact the smart money which is to
say that people who work on this project
the smart money is suggesting that the
fraction of planets that might be
suitable for life is maybe one in a
thousand one in a hundred something like
that well even taking the the
pessimistic estimate that it's one in a
thousand that means that there are at
least a billion cousins of the earth
just in our own galaxy okay now I've
given you a lot of numbers here but
they're mostly big numbers okay so you
know keep that in mind there's plenty of
real estate plenty of real estate in the
universe and if we're the only bit of
real estate in which there's some
interesting occupants that makes you a
miracle I know you like to think you're
a miracle but if you do science you
learn rather quickly that every time you
think you're a miracle
you're wrong so probably not the case
all right so the bottom line is this
because of the increase in speed and
because of the vast amount of habitable
real estate in the cosmos
I figure we're going to pick up a signal
within 2000 years and I feel strongly
enough about that to make a bet with you
either we're going to find et in the
next two dozen years or I'll buy you a
cup of coffee
okay so that's not so bad I mean even
with 2000 years you open up your brows
and there's news of a signal or you know
you get a cup of coffee now let me tell
you about some aspect of this that
people don't think about and that is
what what happens suppose that you know
the what I say is true I mean who knows
but suppose it happens suppose sometime
in the next two thousand years we pick
up a faint line that tells us we have
some cosmic company what is the effect
what's the consequence now I might be at
ground zero for this I happen to know
what the consequence for me would be
because we've had false alarms this is
1997 it's a photo I made it about three
o'clock in the morning in Mountain View
here when we were watching the computer
monitors because we picked up a signal
that we thought this is the real deal
alright and I kept waiting for the men
in black to show up right I kept waiting
for yeah I kept waiting for my mom to
call somebody to call the government to
call nobody called nobody called I was
so nervous that I couldn't sit down I
just wandered around taking photos like
this one just for something to do well
at 9:30 in the morning with my head down
on my desk cuz it obviously hadn't slept
all night the phone rings and it's the
New York Times and I think there's a
lesson in that and that lesson is that
if we pick up a signal the media the
media will be on it faster than a weasel
on ball bearings it's gonna be fast okay
you can be sure that no secrecy okay
that's what happens to me it kind of
ruins my whole whole week because
whatever I got planned that week kind of
out the window but what about you what's
it going to do to you and the answer is
we don't know the answer we don't know
what that's going to do to you not in
the long term and not even very much in
the short term I mean that would be a
bit like asking Chris Columbus in 1491
hey Chris you know what happens if it
turns out that there's a continent
between here and Japan where you're
sailing to what will be the consequences
for Humanity if that turns out to be the
case
probably would offer you some some
answer that you might not have
understood but it probably wouldn't have
been right and I think that to predict
what finding ET is going to mean we
can't predict that either but here a
couple of things I can say to begin with
it's going to be a society that's way in
advance of our own you're not going to
hear from alien Y and Earth also not
building transmitters they're going to
be ahead of us maybe by a few thousand
years maybe by a few million years but
substantially ahead of us and that means
if you can understand anything that
they're going to say then you might be
able to short-circuit history by getting
information from a society that's way
beyond our own now you might find out a
bit hyperbolic and maybe it is but
nonetheless it's conceivable that this
will happen in you know you could
consider this light I don't know giving
Julius Caesar English lessons in the key
to the Library of Congress it would
change his day alright that's one thing
another thing that's for sure going to
happen is that it will calibrate us we
will know that we're not that miracle
right there were just another duck in a
row we're not the only kids on the block
and I think that that's philosophically
a very profound thing to learn we're not
a miracle okay
the third thing that it might tell you
is somewhat vague but I think
interesting and important and that is if
you find a signal coming from a more
advanced society because they will be
that will tell you something about our
own possibilities that we're not
inevitably doomed to self-destruction
because they survived their technology
we could do it too normally when you
look out into the universe you're
looking back in time right that's that's
interesting to cosmologists but in this
sense you actually can look into the
future hazily but you can look into the
future so those are all the sorts of
things that would come from a now let me
talk a little bit about something that
happens even in the meantime and that is
SETI I think is important because it's
exploration and it's not only
exploration its comprehensible
exploration now I got to tell you I'm
I'm you know always reading books about
explorers I find exploration very
interesting Arctic exploration you know
people like Magellan almonds and
Shackleton you see Franklin down there
Scott all these guys it's really nifty
expiration they're just doing it because
they want to explore and you might say
oh that's kind of a frivolous
opportunity but that's not frivolous
that's not a frivolous activity because
I mean think of ants you know most
answer program to follow one another
along it up in a long line but there
couple ants maybe 1% of those ants that
are what they call pioneer ants and
they're the ones that wander off they're
the ones you find on the kitchen
countertop you got to get them with your
thumb before they find their sugar or
something okay but those ants even
though most of them get wiped out those
ants are the ones that are essential to
the survival of the hive so exploration
is important I also think that
exploration is important in terms of
being able to address what I think is a
critical lack in our society and that's
the lack of science literacy the lack of
the ability to even understand science
now look a lot has been written about
the you know the plural state of science
literacy in this country right you've
heard about it well here's one example
in fact polls taken this this poll is
taking ten years ago it shows like a
roughly one third of the public thinks
that the aliens are not only out there
we're looking for them out there but
they're here right sailing the skies and
their saucers and occasionally abducting
people for experiments their parents
wouldn't approve of well that would be
interesting if it was true in job
security for me but I don't think the
evidence is very good that's more you
know sad and significant but there are
other things that people believe that
are significant like the efficacy of
homeopathy or that evolution is just you
know sort of a crazy idea by scientists
without any legs or you know evolution
they know that all that sort of thing
our global warming these sorts of ideas
don't really have any validity that you
can't trust the scientists now we got to
solve that problem because that's a
critically important problem and you you
might say well okay how are we going to
solve that problem with SETI well let me
suggest to you that SETI obviously can't
solve the problem that it can address
the problem it can address the problem
by getting young people interested in
science
look science is hard it has a reputation
of being hard and the facts are it is
hard and that's the result of 400 years
of science right I mean in the 18th
century in the 18th century you could
become an expert on any field of science
in an hour
afternoon by going to a library if you
could find a library right in the 19th
century if you had a basement lab you
could make major scientific discoveries
in your own home right because there was
all this science just lying around
waiting for somebody to pick it up
that's not true anymore today you got to
spend years in grad school and postdocs
positions just to figure out what the
important questions are it's hard
there's no doubt about it and in fact
here's an example the Higgs boson
finding the Higgs boson ask the next ten
people you see on the streets hey do you
think it's worthwhile to spend billions
of Swiss francs looking for the Higgs
boson I've got the answer you're gonna
get as well I don't know what the Higgs
boson is and I don't know if it's
important and probably most of the
people wouldn't even know the value of a
Swiss franc okay and yet we're spending
billions of Swiss francs on this problem
okay so that doesn't get people interest
in science because they can't comprehend
what it's about
SETI on the other hand is really simple
we're gonna use these big antennas we're
gonna try to eavesdrop on signals
everybody can understand that yes
technologically it's very sophisticated
but everybody gets the idea so that's
one thing the other thing is it's
exciting science it's exciting because
we're naturally interested in other
intelligent beings and I think that's
part of our hardwiring I mean we're
hardwired to be interested in beings
that might be if you will competitors or
if you're the romantic sort possibly
even mates okay this is analogous to our
interest in things that have big teeth
right very interesting things that have
big teeth you can see the evolutionary
value of that and you can also see the
practical consequences by watching
watching Animal Planet you notice they
make they make very few programs about
gerbils it's mostly about things that
have big teeth okay
so we're interested in these sorts of
things right and not just us it's it's
also kids this allows you to pay it
forward by using this subject as a hook
to science because SETI involves all
kinds of science obviously biology
obviously astronomy but also geology
also chemistry various scientific
disciplines all can be presented in the
guise of we're looking for et so to me
this is this is interesting and
important and in fact it's my policy
even though I give a lot of talks to
adults you give talks to adults in two
days later they're back where they were
but if you give talks to kids you know
one in 50 of them some light bulb goes
off and and I think gee I've never
thought of that and then they go you
know read a book or a magazine or
whatever they get interested in
something now it's my theory supported
only by anecdotal personal anecdotal
evidence but nonetheless that kids get
interested in something between the ages
of 8 and 11 you got to get them there so
all right give talks adults that's fine
but I try and make 10% of the talks that
I give try and make those for kids okay
I remember when a guy came to our high
school actually Rose actually my junior
high school I was in sixth grade and he
gave some talk all I remember from it
was one word electronics there's like
Dustin Hoffman in the Graduate right
when he said plastics whatever that
means plastics I think I sell
electronics I don't remember anything
else in fact I don't remember anything
that my sixth grade teacher said all
year but I remember electronics and so I
got interested in electronics and you
know I got a study to get my hand
license I was wiring up stuff here I am
at about 15 or something doing that sort
of stuff okay that had a big effect on
me so that's my point that you can have
a big effect on these kids
in fact this reminds me I don't know a
couple years ago I gave a talk at a
school in Palo Alto where there were
about a dozen 11 year olds that come to
this talk I've been brought in to talk
to these kids for an hour 11-year olds
they're all sitting in a little
semicircle looking up at me with big
eyes and I started there was a
whiteboard behind me and I started off
by writing a one with 22 zeros after it
and I said eyes now look there's a
number of stars in the visible universe
and this number is so big there's not
even a name for it okay and one of these
kids shot up his hand and he said well
actually there is a name for it it's a
sex toy quadrat extra something or other
right now that kid was wrong by four or
four orders of magnitude but there was
no doubt about it these kids were smart
okay so I stopped giving the lecture all
they wanted to do was ask questions
in fact my my last comments to these
kids at the end I said you know you kids
are smarter than the people I work with
now
they didn't even care about that what
they wanted what they wanted was my
email address so they could ask me more
questions so let me just say look my job
is a privilege because we're in a
special time previous generations
couldn't do this experiment at all right
in another generation down the line I
think we will have succeeded so to me it
is a privilege and when I look in the
mirror you know the facts are that I
really don't see myself what I see is
the generation behind me these are some
kids from the hub school fourth graders
talk they're what two weeks ago
something like that I think that if you
can instill some interest in science and
how it works well that's a payoff beyond
easy measure thank you very much
you